Training Data Generation
========================

SPTnet includes a pure-Python replacement for the original MATLAB training
video generator. The implementation lives in
``sptnet.training.data_generator`` and is exposed as the
``sptnet-generate-training-data`` command.

The generator writes ``.h5`` HDF5 files by default, with the same dataset names
and cell-reference layout expected by the existing SPTnet training loader.
MATLAB v7.3 ``.mat`` files remain supported because they are HDF5-backed and
can be read by the same ``h5py`` code path.

Quick Start
-----------

Install the package in editable mode, then generate one deterministic smoke
file:

.. code-block:: bash

   python -m pip install -e .
   sptnet-generate-training-data \
       --seed 1458 \
       --num-files 1 \
       --videos-per-file 100 \
       --frames 30 \
       --image-dims 64 \
       --p-num-min 1 \
       --p-num-max 10

By default, generated files are named ``trainingvideos_<index>.h5``. The
default output directory is ``./TestData/training_data`` unless
``SPT_OUTPUT_DIR`` or ``--output-dir`` is provided.

To keep MATLAB-style filenames for comparison with older datasets, use:

.. code-block:: bash

   sptnet-generate-training-data --output-extension .mat

Reproducibility
---------------

Set ``SPT_SEED`` or pass ``--seed`` to make Python output reproducible:

.. code-block:: bash

   SPT_SEED=123 sptnet-generate-training-data

The generated HDF5 file stores the seed, file index, simulation parameters, and
PSF parameters as file attributes. Python and MATLAB use different random
number streams, so the same integer seed should not be expected to produce
bitwise-identical MATLAB and Python videos. Use matched parameters and fixed
seeds for reproducible Python-to-Python comparisons.

Environment Variables
---------------------

The command preserves the CSD3 MATLAB script's environment-variable interface:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Variable
     - Meaning
     - Default
   * - ``SPT_NUM_FILES``
     - Number of output files.
     - ``10``
   * - ``SPT_VIDEOS_PER_FILE``
     - Videos stored in each file.
     - ``100``
   * - ``SPT_FRAMES``
     - Frames per video.
     - ``30``
   * - ``SPT_IMAGE_DIMS``
     - Square image size in pixels.
     - ``64``
   * - ``SPT_P_NUM_MIN``, ``SPT_P_NUM_MAX``
     - Particle-count range per video.
     - ``1``, ``10``
   * - ``SPT_HURST_MIN``, ``SPT_HURST_MAX``
     - Hurst-exponent sampling range.
     - ``0.0001``, ``0.9999``
   * - ``SPT_D_MIN``, ``SPT_D_MAX``
     - Generalized diffusion-coefficient sampling range.
     - ``0.001``, ``0.5``
   * - ``SPT_PHOTON_MIN``, ``SPT_PHOTON_MAX``
     - Photon-count sampling range.
     - ``300``, ``5000``
   * - ``SPT_BG_MIN``, ``SPT_BG_MAX``
     - Uniform background range.
     - ``1``, ``25``
   * - ``SPT_PERLIN_BG_MIN``, ``SPT_PERLIN_BG_MAX``
     - Perlin-background multiplier range.
     - ``0``, ``10``
   * - ``SPT_MOTION_BLUR``
     - Enable oversampled motion blur when true.
     - ``false``
   * - ``SPT_FILE_START``
     - First output file index.
     - ``1``
   * - ``SPT_OUTPUT_EXTENSION``
     - Output extension for generated HDF5 files.
     - ``.h5``
   * - ``SPT_SEED``
     - Deterministic random seed.
     - unset

The command-line flags override the corresponding environment values where a
flag is available.

Simulation Model
----------------

Each video is generated by sampling a particle count, assigning balanced track
durations and start times, generating two-dimensional fractional Brownian
motion trajectories, rendering a pupil-function PSF at each active particle
position, applying OTF rescaling, and adding background plus Poisson noise.

The Python port preserves the MATLAB model components used by the original
generator:

* fractional Brownian motion with covariance
  ``0.5 * (t**(2H) + s**(2H) - abs(t-s)**(2H))``;
* Wyant-ordered Zernike pupil magnitude and phase terms;
* Fourier-domain PSF rendering from the complex pupil function;
* real-space OTF rescaling by convolution with the Gaussian kernel from the
  PSF toolbox;
* optional motion blur by oversampling each video frame;
* HDF5 cell-reference labels for ``Hlabel``, ``Clabel``, ``photonlabel``,
  ``traceposition``, ``moleculeid``, and ``duration``.

Provenance and References
-------------------------

The Python generator is a port of the SPTnet MATLAB training-data generator by
Cheng Bi, Huang Lab, Purdue University. The original SPTnet repository
accompanies the manuscript *SPTnet: a deep learning framework for end-to-end
single-particle tracking and motion dynamics analysis* by Cheng Bi and
co-authors.

The PSF and OTF model follows the MATLAB ``PSF-toolbox`` classes
``PSF_zernike`` and ``OTFrescale`` by Sheng Liu (2018). The Zernike matrix
implementation follows the toolbox's ``Zernike_Polynomials`` class by Michael
Wester (Lidke Lab, University of New Mexico, 2015), which cites:

* Robert J. Noll, "Zernike polynomials and atmospheric turbulence",
  *Journal of the Optical Society of America*, Volume 66, Number 3, March
  1976.
* James C. Wyant and Katherine Creath, *Applied Optics and Optical
  Engineering, Volume XI*, Academic Press, 1992.

The Perlin background routine is ported from the MATLAB ``perlin_noise.m``
helper, whose source comment attributes the implementation to
``https://blog.csdn.net/weixin_42943114/article/details/82110468``.

API Reference
-------------

See :mod:`sptnet.training.data_generator` for the public Python API, including
``SimulationParams``, ``PSFParams``, ``generate_training_file``, and
``generate_training_data``.
